Nixon's visit to China februari 1972
without a doubt this is going to be my
longest podcast since I started this
series so what I thought I'd do was
cover everything that led up to the
fateful week that changed the world in
this podcast and then for part two we'll
start when Nixon's plane actually lands
at Capitol airport it's been 38 years
since Nixon sat down with Mao Zedong and
symbolically jump-started us-china
friendly relations I was only 13 at the
time and not politically informed or
even interested in politics but I
certainly recall when it happened and
what a big sensation it created that
President Nixon had gone to Red China as
we called it back then yeah me too I
grew up in the Cold War days in China
was Red China and never the People's
Republic especially in US diplomatic
circles dead cable TV or Hollywood
hasn't yet made a six-part dramatic film
about this historic moment and all the
events they led up to it is amazing it's
it's really one of the great political
and just overall dramatic slices a
geopolitical history it was historical
theater at its finest in fact it was
such great theatre that 1987 and opera
was made called nixon in china by
richard adams that honestly I never took
the time to see but you could see slices
of it on YouTube and Google in this
internet age where there's a news
reporter behind every bush there's no
way Nixon or anyone could have pulled
off such a secret and dramatic coup in
this podcast I wanted to relive those
moments and show chronologically how
events unfolded establishing diplomatic
relations with China was not a
spur-of-the-moment decision for Nixon it
all began with his election in the
tumultuous year of 1968 which those of
us old enough to remember was the year
dr. Martin Luther King was assassinated
Senator Robert Kennedy was shot Vietnam
War was raging and full living color in
our living rooms every night I lived in
the north suburbs of Chicago where that
year there were the famous riots
downtown at the Democratic National
Convention we won't rehash the 1968
election or anything let's just say
Nixon won and he took office in january
nineteen sixty-nine februari first he
sends a memo to Kissinger his national
secure
advisor telling him to start sending out
feelers to China but he added and I
quote this of course should be done
privately and under no circumstances get
into the public prints from this
direction liberals and conservatives
with a great degree of certainty would
both attack Nixon if they knew this path
was being explored liberals because they
hated Mao successes and dictatorial ways
and the Conservatives because talking to
China was like taking a knife and
stabbing our South Vietnamese Taiwanese
and Japanese allies in the back and then
there was the whole matter of the Soviet
Union and the interesting Cold War
dynamic that existed there at this
moment in time yeah Nixon was right to
keep this one under his hat he knew if
he got the State Department involved it
would leak in five seconds and then he'd
be under attack by everyone even before
he got to first base so they had two
secrets to keep first was the diplomatic
aspect no one could know the US was
going to establish relations with China
and all the implications of such an act
the second secret was the actual visit
of Nixon to China not only was this a
matter of great significance
diplomatically but politically for Nixon
this was a career-defining coup that
could be the crowning jewel in his long
life of public service and politics they
were just massively explosive
geopolitical circumstances back in that
day we look at our world today in the
age of terrorism think this is so unique
it is in a way but geopolitically it was
no less secure than when Nixon took
office back in nineteen sixty-nine the
Chinese had fallen out with the Soviets
over the years and by 1961 it was
official so China and Russia weren't the
blood brothers they were just after the
heady days of liberation in 1949 Nixon
is barely in office a month when on
March second 1969 the Chinese ambushed
some Soviet troops on a frozen Island in
Siberia by the azzurri river the Soviets
called it domanski island and the
Chinese called a gin ball island there
was a 20-minute skirmish there and 23
Soviet troops were killed and 14 wounded
13 days later a March fifteenth there
was a more intense battle with tanks
anti-tank rockets artillery it was this
USSR vs. china and
winter duking it out on the border no
one would back down and when they faced
off against each other and this thing
happened so Nixon used this raw wound as
a perfect pathway to the Chinese door
after this kind of dust up along the
'sorry River surely the Chinese would be
in more of a mood to talk than before
and they were Nixon had to move fast
because they were liberal elements of
Congress who wanted to cozy up to China
these were mostly Democrats and there
was no way Nixon was going to allow them
to get the jump on him so in addition to
other reasons that made the early part
of 1969 so timely there was all the
jockeying going on by Democrats to visit
China to start a dialogue so Nixon had
to move fast and secretly to beat anyone
else to Beijing however it must have
been comforting Nixon that after it was
a fete accompli he had this base already
in place in Congress he knew it was
going to create a storm and he needed
all the support and government he can
get mild Zidane had his reasons for
wanting all this to come about to of
course he was anxious to show the
Russians he wasn't someone to be taken
lightly and he wanted to use this
meeting with Nixon as a way to shock the
Soviets with regard to ongoing and
future matters of concern between these
two antagonistic neighbors ever since
Stalin died in 1953 Mao had his eye on
the USA even through all his atrocities
and railing against the West in general
in the u.s. in particular he knew it was
going to need the US and it was better
to have them on China's side than
against China he had to embrace Stalin
of course when the Chinese Communists
came to power no way Americo is going to
recognize the PRC having cast their lot
with the Nationalists Mao had no choice
but to embrace Stalin who gave them
support Soviet technology and arms but
Mao was no dummy and he knew the real
prize was the US so for the rest of 1969
the relations between Russia and China
were not too good and there was a real
and valid fair that these whole border
tensions could erupt into war even
nuclear war Malmuth for the balance of
the air with his most trusted comrades
in arms like yet ya Yin niranjan
ye xu xiang chen and together with Joe's
intelligence they pondered the matter of
the US and how this piece fit into the
puzzle that was China so how did this
all start to happen Nixon gets into
office and tells kissing her to go find
a way to open the door we didn't have
any diplomatic relations yet so there
were no official channels that left back
to our channels but who to trust what
mutual friends were there well there was
France there was Pakistan and there was
Romania we used all three backdoor
channels and it was slow going and
tedious but Nixon was really given off
the love potion and the Chinese were
getting all kinds of obvious signals
that Nixon was serious September
seventeen nineteen sixty-nine these four
marshals that was yeah yeah Chun and
shoot they were all great heroes of the
revolution they wrote this memo to Mao
saying China's strategic benefit lie
inconspicuously making use of tensions
between the Americans and the Soviets to
quote strengthen our position in short
and talks that were coming up in Warsaw
it was suggested that China secretly
engaged the Americans and the Americans
were of course chasing the Chinese then
in late nineteen sixty nine mile blew
off a couple of H bombs on the shin jung
deserts with a million Soviet troops at
his board are ready to invade at a
moment's notice this put the soviets i
noticed that mad Mao had the wherewithal
to inflict some heavy damage to and he
didn't need any missiles to do it
because the two countries were right
next door to one another he could
inflict pain on the Soviets the
old-fashioned way by dropping a nuclear
bomb out of an airplane they went back
to the table and resumed their border
dispute discussions another huge signal
Nixon sent to the Chinese in October
1969 was the cancellation of naval
patrols in the Taiwan Strait that had
been going on since the Korean War this
was how we flew the flag and
symbolically demonstrated our commitment
to Taiwan so we passed this bit of news
to a visiting Pakistani diplomat who
dutifully brought it to the Chinese this
impressed them and was taken as a good
sign by februari 1970 there are already
136 rounds of talks between the Chinese
and the American
all unofficial all secret during the
hundred and thirty sixth round of talks
these between Chinese diplomat young lay
and American ambassador de Polan and
veteran diplomat Walter Jace tussle
Nixon achieved what he wanted a meeting
with no preconditions young lee said
quote if the US government wishes to
send a representative of ministerial
rank or a special envoy of the US
president to beijing for further
exploration of questions and fundamental
principle between China and the United
States the Chinese government will be
willing to receive them bingo all the
back-channel dealings with our Pakistani
friends since the summer of 69 and up
until the Warsaw meetings had borne
fruit now how to handle it april
nineteen seventy Nixon ordered the State
Department cut out of these secret
discussions the consequences of this
news about meeting the Chinese would
completely devastate Nixon's presidency
which was up to its ears in Vietnam he
had general Vernon Walters send a
message to joe enlai stating the US
State Department was not to be consulted
and should purposely for the time being
be left out of the discussions general
Walters delivered this letter to the
Chinese ambassador in France without
consulting her own ambassador there
everything else was going well but then
nixon invaded Cambodia and the talks
faltered Mao went on one of his famous
rampages against us imperialism and it's
just infuriated Nixon but it was all
necessary bluster as mal couldn't just
stand by and say nothing after Nixon
started bombing Cambodia so this was a
temporary setback but the common goal
was still very much still alive and by
July 1970 the US was sending out
friendly signals through their proxies
in Romania a national day October first
1970 mao invited his old friend the old
china hand edgar snow to Tienanmen to
view the celebrations anyone who studied
Mao's China and College surely read
snows famous 1937 book red star over
China he spoke fluent Chinese and was
considered a law ponyo of China an old
friend the following month Joanne lie
told snow that
the government had responded
affirmatively to overtures from
Washington to resume the sino-american
discussions that had ended abruptly in
warsaw 1969 suddenly on october 13 full
diplomatic relations were established
between china and canada this sure took
a lot of air out of Nixon's balloon as
he was hoping to take all the glory as
far as opening up China was concerned so
the urgency became even greater we're
still going back and forth using the
Pakistanis as our go-between and on
December eighteenth mouth sent for his
old friend Edgar snow who was holed up
at the old beijing hotel and he asked
him to join him for breakfast snow went
and he met with mao at his residence and
jeonghan hi and after a friendly banter
back and forth the conversation evolved
where Mouse said simply he Nick meaning
nixon had been sending messages through
various channels for quite some time
saying he wants to send a representative
hair and we have said yes we would
receive him but then he doesn't do
anything about it we haven't published
the messages because the secret is to be
kept he's not interested in the warsaw
talks in poland he wants to talk face to
face with us that's why i say if Nixon
is willing to come I would be willing to
talk with him and it would be all right
if the talks weren't successful whether
or not we quarrel or whether or not he
comes as a tourist or as president for
talks so he couldn't ask for something
to be more in the bag than that I mean
this came straight from Mao no
go-betweens to spin it or misconstrue
his meaning edgar snow went back and
tried to sell the story to various news
outlets but he had sort of a fringe
leftist reputation among journalists and
the only ones who took great interest in
it was the Nixon White House it was the
end of 1970 and Nixon wasn't having much
luck making a breakthrough with the
Chinese Andrei Gromyko and the Russian
ambassador Dobrynin we're we're toying
with Nixon about a date for a u.s.
Soviet summits which was like never
going to happen Vietnam which is going
nowhere and his only option seemed to be
to escalate it more the Cold War was
still throbbing and the US was facing
down the Soviets all over the world I
mean by the end of nineteen seventy they
were discussing brass tacks the Chinese
wanted the purpose of the meeting to be
a discussion
on resolving the Taiwan question Nixon
insisted cover a broad range of issues
however he sent signals that vacating
Taiwan of a US military presence was
possible enter 1971 George McGovern
announces his candidacy for president he
immediately calls for recognition of
communist China and giving Beijing the
seats in the UN and on the Security
Council he even told Nixon he should
open up commerce between the two nations
Nixon in the meantime was bombing laws
but he immediately went on record to say
that this was not directed at Communist
China then it but anyway China lambasted
him because they had to and I mean Louis
was on the border with Union in
autonomous region in China sort of like
a province in February 1971 Nixon refers
to Red China as the people's republic of
china in his state of the world speech
this was the first time the official
name of China was used publicly and by
someone so high ranking the overtures
Nixon gave in this speech were all well
received passport restrictions on China
were to be lifted and the 20-year trade
embargo against China also was to be
ended march 21st 1971 the chinese ping
pong team arrives in japan for the world
championships an April fourth one of
these random things happen that just
defines a moment in history American
player Glenn Cowen 19 at the time
boarded the Chinese team bus that was
enroute to some tourist destination
during the ping pong championships some
pearl farm or something so anyway Glenn
Cowen gets on any spontaneously strikes
up a conversation with china star player
drugs adult the next day Glen cow and
gave drung a souvenir t-shirt and drunk
aive him a Chinese hand-painted
handkerchief and the press got it all on
film and was on the front pages of the
Japanese press and showed these two
shaking hands on the bus then Cowen
mentioned how he wished the US team
could go to China to compete well of
course this was news in China and Joe
and Mao were dead set against it but Mao
he came around and in a famous story
well documented by Mao's grandniece late
in the evening of april sixth he called
her to his bed
which was a study and where he hung out
all the time and he told her to go ahead
and invite the American ping pong team
to China he could say all the hard work
secret negotiations and sending
clandestine notes back and forth and
sending all these diplomatic signals and
then setback after setback and one
missed opportunity after another finally
there was no turning back now and of
course the international press has
jumped all over this as soon as it was
announced then the term ping-pong
diplomacy was born the US team was given
a dazzling welcome upon their arrival in
China orchestrated by premier Joe
himself the coverage was just
unbelievable and the whole idea of how a
sporting event turned into front-page
news all over the world was just a huge
story in itself and Nixon was giddy from
all the positive press it got and how it
reflected well on him and sort of
cemented this inevitability of us-china
diplomatic relations if there was ever a
time to grab this political capital and
use it for the most difficult sensitive
and Sisyphean task of all now is the
time hanging out there for all to see
was the largest festering wound a great
malignancy on the us-china relationship
the Taiwan question they were our
erstwhile allies going back to the days
of sun yat-sen we fought the good fight
with them in World War two and we backed
them to the hilt in the civil war with
mouths communist when they retreated to
Taiwan in 1949 we stuck with them all
these years and protected them by
putting them underneath our strategic
military umbrella and all these years ma
barked but he never bit the PLA never
invaded Taiwan because it meant war with
the United States suddenly Taiwan wasn't
such a matter worth fighting for for the
Americans this issue was of paramount
importance to the Chinese I mean nothing
even came close to this in terms of its
relative importance compared to all
other issues Kissinger no and Nixon no
there was no use even bothering to talk
to China unless this issue was dragged
out put on the table and discuss
definitively decisively and once and for
all meanwhile April 14th and the ping
pong team is still in Beijing and
premier Joe hosts a
banquet for them at the Great Hall of
the People he toasts them and says you
have opened up a new chapter in the
relations of the American and Chinese
people I am confident that this
beginning again of our friendship will
certainly meet with the majority support
of our two peoples the bus was really
gathering momentum now all that remained
was to discuss the dates and of course
for Nixon to figure out how to handle
Taiwan the Chinese team was invited to
play in the US Joe accepted the
invitations the love fest was going on
but there was still nothing concrete
about who were when until just after six
in the evening when the Pakistani
ambassador visited Nixon in Palm Springs
with a message from Joe that read and I
quote at present contacts between the
PRC and the US are being reviewed
however if relations between China and
the US are to be restored fundamentally
the US must withdraw all its armed
forces from China's Taiwan and Taiwan
Strait area a solution to this critical
question can be found only through
direct discussions between high-level
responsible persons of the two countries
therefore the Chinese government
reaffirms its willingness to receive
publicly in Beijing a special envoy of
President of the United States or even
the President of the United States
himself for a direct meeting and
discussions even though Joe had
mentioned meeting publicly Nixon wasn't
quite ready for that yet it had to be a
total surprise that to complete before
he could announce a presidential visit
in baskin that moment of glory Kissinger
wasn't Nixon's first choice for envoy
but in the end he was the best man for
the sensitive and monumental task
there's a whole slew of declassified
documents showing all the communication
going on between all the secret
intermediaries Pakistanis the fringe
everyone let me read a letter that was
handed by Kissinger directly to
Pakistani ambassador to the US I got
lolly on May tenth 1971 ambassador
hilali and Pakistani president yahya
khan had been invaluable as the perfect
intermediaries between the most
sensitive
times leading up to and including this
moment this is Nixon's answer to Joe and
lie about how to move forward and cut to
the chase with respect to this ice
breaking visit and I'm reading from this
letter President Nixon has carefully
studied the message of April 21st 1971
from premier Joe Enlai conveyed through
the courtesy of president yahya khan
President Nixon agrees that direct
high-level negotiations are necessary to
resolve the issues dividing the United
States of America in the People's
Republic of China because of the
importance he attaches to normalizing
relations between our two countries
President Nixon was prepared to accept
the suggestion of premier Joe and lie
that he visit Peking for direct
conversations with the leaders of the
People's Republic of China at such a
meeting each side would be free to raise
the issue of principal concern to it in
order to prepare the visit by President
Nixon and to establish reliable contact
with the leaders of the Chinese People's
Republic President Nixon proposes a
preliminary and he underlines the word
secret meeting between his assistant for
national security affairs dr. Kissinger
and premier Joe and lie or another
appropriate high-level Chinese official
dr. Kissinger would be prepared to
attend such a meeting on Chinese soil
preferably at some location within
convenient flying distance from Pakistan
to be suggested by the People's Republic
of China dr. Kissinger would be
authorized to discuss the circumstances
which would make a visit by President
Nixon most useful the agenda of such a
meeting the time of such a visit and to
begin a preliminary exchange of views
and all subjects of mutual interest if
it should be thought desirable that a
special emissary come to Peking publicly
between the secret visit to the People's
Republic of China of dr. Kissinger in
the arrival of President Nixon dr.
Kissinger will be authorized to arrange
it it is anticipated that the visit of
President Nixon to Peking could be
announced within a short time of the
secret meeting between dr. Kissinger and
premier Chou Enlai dr. Kissinger will be
prepared to come from June fifteenth
onward
it is proposed at the precise details of
dr. Kissinger's trip including location
duration of stay communication and
similar matters be discussed through the
good offices of president yahya khan and
then here he underlines this again for
secrecy it is essential that no other
channel be used it is also understood
that the first meeting between dr.
Kissinger and high levels of the
People's Republic of China be strictly
secret you can spend forever on the
Google just tracking down all these
documents from days gone by that have
been Declassified you can get actual
PDFs of the documents which as we all
know were typewritten july nine to
eleven were the dates selected for the
secret visit by kissinger he flew to
asia under the cover of a fact-finding
trip and before sunrise on july knife
kissinger secretly boarded a pakistani
airways boeing 707 for Beijing which
back then was still referred to as
Peking to explain his absence for two
days kissinger staff maintained that he
was recuperating from stomach problems
being a westerner in pakistan and all it
was a perfectly believable ploy he flew
six hours across China and landed in
Beijing around noon marshal ya Yin Yin
and the veteran diplomat Wanhua met him
at the airport they were whisked to do
you tie in Western Beijing where foreign
dignitaries were ensconced and where
many meetings took place with visiting
bigshots Kissinger didn't know it at the
time but North Korean dictator Kim
Nielsen was in situ at da chi and on a
state visit he was the father of North
Korea's current dear leader Kim jong-il
so Kissinger gets to his villa in four
hours later Joe enters and you have the
great photo op of the two meeting and
shaking hands then they sat down on one
of these patented Chinese overstuffed
sofas and Kissinger was given a free
lesson in diplomacy from the master say
what you want about Henry Kissinger
brilliant diplomats statesman war
criminal scholar the truth was he was
the best guy for this job and handled it
admirably considering the pressure he
was under here he was 48 years old the
visiting team
sitting next to a man it was not only
the premier of China but a man who was a
true revolutionary and a nation builder
as much as Jefferson Madison or Hamilton
were to the founding of America he was a
statesman extraordinaire and very
respected in diplomatic circles his
contemporaries on the world stage were
guys like Roosevelt de Gaulle Churchill
nehru-gandhi Stalin and here was
Kissinger sitting with this great and
elegant man who spoke all these
languages and was so cool and calm and
collected Joe sits down with Kissinger
and says something to the extent that
it's a Chinese custom to always let
guests speak first and then Joe had
remarked on these big fat black binders
stuffed with all of Kissinger's briefing
papers and China they were painstakingly
researched and compiled by his staff and
on the table before Joe and live was
just a single sheet of paper with some
handwritten notes the meeting commenced
and Kissinger went right at it he laid
it all out Nixon was willing to meet
with Mao he would assure him the US
would never secretly join with the
Soviets to gang up on China and if the
Russians made any agreements that
affected China in any way they would
brief the Chinese on this Kissinger was
playing the Soviet card big time and
inferred often that the Soviets were
their common foe he did an extraordinary
thing that was not lost on the Chinese
he offered to provide full and complete
details gathered by US intelligence
services and Russian troop deployments
on the border with China he did this and
you could actually get these documents
they're all online and declassified then
the issue of Taiwan was raised the big
one Kissinger assured the following what
the US would reduce their forces there
as relations improved to the US did not
seek to China's or one China one Taiwan
solution to the US did not seek to
China's or one China one Taiwan solution
and he didn't seek an independent Taiwan
you got that big one out of the way the
three nose with that out of the way they
went right into it three Kissinger also
promised Joe that Nixon would never
support a military attack on the
mainland from Taiwan for he was
prepared to withdraw two-thirds of
American forces from the island at the
end of the Vietnam War and five Nixon
would be willing to formally recognize
Beijing during his second term Kissinger
finished his one hour opening statement
with these words all promised in secret
Nixon was legitimizing the Chinese
Communists Joe may have reacted as cool
as a cucumber but with this opening
statement China got everything it wanted
or at least what was most important Joe
gave his statement and didn't mince
words to normalize relations the US
would have to recognize Beijing as the
legitimate government of China and at
Taiwan was a Chinese province the US
would also have to withdraw all military
forces and installations from Taiwan and
the taiwan straits by a certain time to
be decided essentially Kissinger was
participating in this Beijing opera with
Joanne live whereby they could on the
one hand give in to China on Taiwan but
at the same time that looked like they
sold an old friend up the river same
thing with Vietnam if the u.s. withdrew
from Vietnam some time was needed for
the South Vietnamese regime to hang in
there a little while for Taiwan the US
would abandon their old friend but China
had to come out and say they wouldn't
use any force to take them back Joe
didn't give in on this and was
non-committal about using force to unify
Taiwan with the mainland then a
sensitive political issue was raised
Kissinger didn't want anyone from the
Democratic Party in China before Nixon
Joe made it plain he had not answered
any of the pile of letters from American
democratic politicians clamoring to
visit China after the second day they
needed to hammer out some kind of
official statement summarizing each
other's position and how the
presidential visit would go down there
were three paragraphs on one single page
basically it states that talks were held
in beijing july nine to eleven nixon was
invited to china and had accepted it
also stated that the leaders of the two
countries would seek normalization of
relations and exchange views and
questions of concern on the two sides
Kissinger left Beijing and snuck back
into Pakistan he flew back to the US and
Nixon at San Clemente home on July
thirteenth 1971 now they had to plan not
only the announcement of the secret
visit but the imminent visit of Nixon
probably in early nineteen seventy-two I
think I'm going to stop here we're
already over a half hour on this episode
when I started this Chinese history
podcast project I anticipated a weekly
show of 10 or 15-minute dim sum morsels
of Chinese historical events they've
been averaging about 18 minutes in
length but some are longer than others
depending on the subject matter and the
magnitude of my verbosity on the day
I've recorded the show so next week
we'll pick up whereupon Henry Kissinger
returns to the US and our 37th President
Richard Nixon goes on national TV and
drops the big bombshell that not only
have we been talking to the Chinese
about normalizing relations that Nixon
himself was going to visit China I know
it's going to be hard to wait to hear
the exciting second part of this drama
but you'll just have to hang in there so
this is laszlo Montgomery once again
wishing you a fond and friendly farewell
from the green and pleasant town of
Claremont California one of the top five
places to live in America well according
to Money Magazine anyway join us again
next week for the exciting conclusion of
this week's podcast